---
layout: post
title: "Weekly 6: Enjoying FNA for Project Ball Game..."
date: 2023-10-01 13:34 +0800
categories: [Blog, Weekly]
---

Hi! 

This update post is short. I originally wanted to write more, such as how its been smooth working with [FNA](https://fna-xna.github.io/) as the basis for the custom game engine I am making for all my commerical games... or how I had to learn to [scale my game's resolution properly](https://github.com/FNA-XNA/FNA/issues/292) or how I am experimenting with using Inkscape to develop art assets for my games rather than amauter pixel art. I, however, decided that topics like that would work better as individual tutorial posts in the future, once I am more familiar with the concepts. 

The main update is that I realize I should be scoping down even lower for my games. I should aim to join a game jam every other week, and turn the good entries into commerical games that are done within a month. It is better to train with quantity over quality early on, and I had to learn that the advice of 'adding buffer time to deadlines' does not apply to managing the scope of a product (but more the difficulty of the tasks involved in them). I was given some constructive feedback over the past week that spending 5 months on a game this early in my career is going to be a less valuable use of my time than making 5 games in 5 months. The first few games are going to be average in quality anyways, no matter how much work I could put into them, because of my lack of experience.

Otherwise, this post is just a quick one to keep the blog alive while I work on more detailed posts. There is progress still being made.
