---
layout: post
title: "Weekly 9: Some volunteer work" 
categories: [Blog, Weekly]
date: 2023-10-29 10:29 +0800
---

I noticed that last week I had forgotten to post a separate Weekly post in addition to the Game-A-Week post. This was because my Sunday was pretty busy that week and I had nothing to really mention in addition to the Game A Week. These small jam game projects have been a very effective way for me to learn a lot of 'soft skills' involving scoping a project, planning them, tracking my time and being able to give more and more accurate estimates of how fast I can complete work due to practicing a Daily Scrum for them. I think those skills will suit me well, even if game development itself remains more as a hobby. These projects are also building up the skills I need to complete next year's Halloween game too, which I want to release as a full commerical project on Steam.

This week is somewhat similar. Beyond 'Game-A-Week' all I coud really type for this week's Weekly post is that I have some other projects that aren't related to Game-A-Week being planned... but I prefer to write about what I have done rather than what I plan to do. I would state that two of them are not related to developing a video game, though, so that is a nice way to branch out. I will write more about them as they are worked on.

There are also some other commitments I have started to pick up, such as volunteering at the [National Library Board](https://www.nlb.gov.sg/main/home) and volunteering for OpenLibrary(https://openlibrary.org/). In the latter, I am learning a ton as I am being exposed to an actual web project that is in production, with a docker container and everything. It is interesting seeing a codebase that isn't a video game or game engine and having to navigate around it and get comfortable, but the skills of being able to read through documentation and slowly following the trail of code seems to be same. 

In my first hour, I learned the existence of [infogami](https://openlibrary.org/dev/docs/infogami) that is used by OpenLibrary, which is based on [web.py](https://webpy.org/). Web.py is new to me, along with using Python for web development in general, but I am getting the hang of it decently okay. Still, I am too green to write more about it at the moment, and am still working on finishing my first pull request to fix a bug for the project, which involves the setting of a cookie. 

I suppose once I am done with that pull request, it could warrant a post of its own what it was like to work on it and how I was able to adapt to that new codebase.
