---
layout: post
title: "Weekly 14: Lots of content for next week..."
categories: [Blog, Weekly]
date: 2024-01-15 19:16 +0800
---

I am going to be effectively missing this week's post deadline. The current project I wanted to write about here took more time than expected to do, as the scope demands expanded. I prefer to write about what I have done rather than what I am planning to do, so I will leave the details for that for next week's post. The only thing I would write is that its inspired by the destruction physics of the Worms games.

Regardless, I still figured it is better to write something rather than nothing, at least to show that I am aware that my blog exists and that I had make this weekly update commitment. One of the other tools I am working on, however, should help improve my productivity for blog posts by a huge degree. I am creating some scripts to automate the process of drafting a blog post, embedding the images and uploading it to this Github pages from my local machine with easy. I had already calculated based off the time I had spent uploading blog post and their drafts that this simple script would be worth developing some time into. It should take, at most, four hours of work to complete. I will write more about it next week.

Hopefully, if all goes well, this would be the last post in this blog's more 'draught' state before the blog transitions to very frequent updates, as the process and barrier of uploading new content would be eliminated. It is observable that the more tedious/difficult it is to do something, the less someone does would do it, even if its only 15 minutes of tedium.

Anyways, yes, the blog isn't dead.